The Nature and Importance of Language
Learning is a complex process of discovery, collaboration, and
inquiry facilitated by language. Composed of interrelated andrule-governed symbol systems, language is a social and uniquelyhuman means of representing, exploring, and communicatingmeaning. As well as being a defining feature of culture, languageis an unmistakable mark of personal identity, and is essential forforming interpersonal relationships, understanding socialsituations, extending experience, reflecting on thought and action,and contributing to a democratic society. Language is the primarybasis of all communication and the primary instrument of thought.
Language Acquisition and Development
Language learning is an active process that begins at birth andcontinues throughout life. Students learn language as they use it tocommunicate their thoughts, feelings, and experiences, establishrelationships with family members and friends, and strive to makesense and order of their world. They may come to school speakingmore than one language, or learn another language in school. It isimportant to respect and build upon each student’s first language.Experience in one language will benefit the learning of otherlanguages.
In their early years, children develop language informally. Long
before they understand explicit language rules and conventions,they reproduce and use language to construct and convey newmeaning in unique ways. Later, language learning occurs inspecific contexts for specific purposes, such as learning about aparticular topic, participating in the community, and pursuingwork and leisure activities.Language development is continuous and recursive. Students
enhance their language learning by using what they know in newand more complex contexts and with increasing sophistication.They reflect upon and use prior knowledge to extend and enhancetheir language and understanding. By learning and incorporatingnew language structures into their repertoire and using them in avariety of contexts, students develop language fluency andproficiency. Positive learning experiences in language-richenvironments enable students to leave school with a desire tocontinue to extend their knowledge, skills and strategies, andinterests.
Language Learning: A Shared Responsibility
All students can be successful learners. Responsibility forlanguage learning is shared by students, parents, teachers, and thecommunity. Students require ongoing opportunities to uselanguage in its many forms. Opportunities to learn language occurfirst at home and are extended as children move into the largercommunity. Schools provide environments where studentscontinue to develop language knowledge, skills, and strategies toachieve personal, social, and academic goals.
Language development is the responsibility of all teachers. For
example, subject area teachers teach the specialized language andforms of each subject. Language arts teachers, however, have aspecial role because of their focus on language, its forms andfunctions. They help students develop and apply strategies forcomprehending, composing, and responding in a variety ofsituations.
3S2 English Language Arts Language and Language Learning
Language and Language LearningThinking and Learning Through Language
Thinking, learning, and language are interrelated. From
Kindergarten to Senior 4, students use language to make sense ofand bring order to their world. They use language to examine newexperiences and knowledge in relation to their prior knowledge,experiences, and beliefs. They make connections, anticipatepossibilities, reflect upon ideas, and determine courses of action.Students’ language development is integral to their success inevery area in school.
Language enables students to play an active role in various
communities of learners within and beyond the classroom. Asstudents speak, write, and represent, they also listen to, read, andview the ideas and experiences of others. Critical and creativethinking and learning through language occur when studentsreflect, speculate, create, analyze, and synthesize.
In addition, language enables students to develop metacognition;
that is, it enables them to reflect upon and control their ownthinking and learning processes. Language helps students developan awareness of the skills and strategies they need to completelearning tasks successfully and to communicate about themselvesas learners.
Recent Developments in Understanding LanguageLearning
The ELA Framework reflects an expanded understanding, basedon recent research, of how students develop language and literacyskills. The ELA Framework
• incorporates viewing and representing as language arts, in
addition to listening, speaking, reading, and writing
• reflects and stresses the integrated nature of the six language
arts• acknowledges the important and unique nature of early
literacy, a concept recognizing that children begin to developliteracy long before they enter school and that theirexperiences continue to influence language learning
• recognizes that each learner constructs knowledge actively
based on his or her own prior knowledge and experiences
• encourages interactive processes that facilitate the social
construction of knowledge
• acknowledges the importance of students’ affective
(emotional) response in learning situations, and focuses onfostering engagement and connecting learning to students’experiences and interests
• encourages strategic thinking and promotes the development,
for each student, of a repertoire of strategies for use in problemsolving and literacy tasks
• encourages risk taking and independence as steps in the
language learning process, and promotes the gradual release ofresponsibility for learning from teacher to student
• promotes the importance of inquiry and critical thinking in the
development of reflective learners
• emphasizes that metacognition (awareness of one’s own
thinking and learning) enables learners to plan, monitorprogress, and evaluate personal learning
• promotes active, resource-based learning that draws on a broad
range of human, technological, and other resources fromwithin and beyond the school
• emphasizes the impact of technological advances on language
teaching and learning
• recognizes the impact of media on students in extending
learning within and beyond the traditional boundaries ofschool 
4Language and Language Learning S2 English Language ArtsThe English Language Arts
The study of English language arts enables each student to
understand and appreciate language, and to use it competently andconfidently in a variety of situations for communication, personalsatisfaction, and learning. Students become competent andconfident users of all six language arts through many opportunitiesto listen, speak, read, write, view, and represent in a variety ofcombinations and through a wide range of relevant texts.
Instruction in all six language arts equips students for effective
participation in a technological society in which information,communication, and entertainment are increasingly conveyed inlanguage forms other than print. In the ELA Framework, the terms“text” and “reading” are used inclusively: 
•Text refers to all language forms that can be discussed, studied,
and analyzed. This includes: print texts such as fiction andnon-fiction books, essays, and news reports; oral texts such asstorytelling, dialogues, speeches, and conversations; and visualtexts such as pictures, diagrams, tableaux, mime, and non-verbal communication.
•Reading refers to constructing meaning from texts of any kind.
Texts are affected and influenced by how they are transmitted,
whether by computer, television, radio, or book. Media texts andelectronic texts such as videos, films, cartoons, and electronicallydistributed magazines frequently include oral, written, and visualcomponents simultaneously. The language arts are clearlyinterrelated and interdependent: students need knowledge, skills, andstrategies in all six language arts to compose, comprehend, andrespond to texts.
The student learning outcomes presented in the ELA Framework
integrate the six language arts. In selecting learning resources and inplanning instruction and assessment, teachers strive to achievevariety and balance in the use of the six language arts.Listening and Speaking
Oral language is the foundation of literacy. Through listening and
speaking, people communicate thoughts, feelings, experiences,information, and opinions, and learn to understand themselves andothers. Oral language carries a community’s stories, values,beliefs, and traditions.
Listening and speaking enable students to explore ideas and
concepts as well as to understand and organize their experiencesand knowledge. They use oral language to learn, solve problems,and reach goals. To become discerning, lifelong learners, studentsat all grades need to develop fluency and confidence in their orallanguage abilities. They benefit from many opportunities to listenand speak both informally and formally for a variety of purposes. 
Reading and Writing
Reading and writing are powerful means of communicating and
learning. They enable students to extend their knowledge and useof language, increase their understanding of themselves andothers, and experience enjoyment and personal satisfaction. 
Reading provides students with a means of accessing the ideas,
views, and experiences of others. By using effective reading skillsand strategies, students construct meaning and develop thoughtfuland critical interpretations of a variety of texts such as both shortand book-length fiction and non-fiction. Writing enables studentsto explore, shape, and clarify their thoughts, and to communicatethem to others. By using effective writing strategies, studentsdiscover and refine ideas and compose and revise with increasingconfidence and skill. 
Viewing and Representing
Viewing and representing are integral parts of contemporary life.
They allow students to understand the ways in which images andlanguage may be used to convey ideas, values, and beliefs.
5S2 English Language Arts Language and Language Learning6Viewing is an active process of attending to and comprehending
visual media such as television, advertising images, films,diagrams, symbols, photographs, videos, drama, drawings,sculpture, and paintings. Viewing enables students to acquireinformation and to appreciate the ideas and experiences of others.Many of the comprehension processes involved in reading (suchas previewing, predicting, and making inferences) are also used inviewing.
Representing enables students to communicate information and
ideas through a variety of media, video presentations, posters,diagrams, charts, symbols, visual art, drama, mime, and models.Language and Language Learning S2 English Language Arts